Volume I 



Letter I 



To Mrs. Saville, England. 

St. Petersburgh, Dec. 11th, 17—. 

You will rejoice to hear that no disaster has accom- 
panied the commencement of an enterprise which 
you have regarded with such evil forebodings. I 
arrived here yesterday; and my first task is to as- 
sure my dear sister of my welfare, and increasing 
confidence in the success of my undertaking. 

I am already far north of London; and as I walk 
in the streets of Petersburgh, I feel a cold north- 
ern breeze play upon my cheeks, which braces my 



nerves, and fills me with delight. Do you understand 
this feeling? This breeze, which has travelled from 
the regions towards which I am advancing, gives 
me a foretaste of those icy climes. Inspirited by 
this wind of promise, my day dreams become more 
fervent and vivid. I try in vain to be persuaded that 
the pole is the seat of frost and desolation; it ever 
presents itself to my imagination as the region of 
beauty and delight. There, Margaret, the sun is for 
ever visible; its broad disk just skirting the horizon, 
and diffusing a perpetual splendour. There — for 
with your leave, my sister, I will put some trust in 
preceding navigators — there snow and frost are 
banished; and, sailing over a calm sea, we may 
be wafted to a land surpassing in wonders and in 
beauty every region hitherto discovered on the hab- 
itable globe. Its productions and features may be 
without example, as the phaenomena of the heav- 
enly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered 
solitudes. What may not be expected in a country 
of eternal light? I may there discover the wondrous 
power which attracts the needle; and may regulate 



a thousand celestial observations, that require only 
this voyage to render their seeming eccentricities 
consistent for ever. I shall satiate my ardent cu- 
riosity with the sight of a part of the world never 
before visited, and may tread a land never before 
imprinted by the foot of man. These are my entice- 
ments, and they are sufficient to conquer all fear of 
danger or death, and to induce me to commence 
this laborious voyage with the joy a child feels when 
he embarks in a little boat, with his holiday mates, 
on an expedition of discovery up his native river. 
But, supposing all these conjectures to be false, 
you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I 
shall confer on all mankind to the last generation, by 
discovering a passage near the pole to those coun- 
tries, to reach which at present so many months are 
requisite; or by ascertaining the secret of the mag- 
net, which, if at all possible, can only be effected by 
an undertaking such as mine. 

These reflections have dispelled the agitation 
with which I began my letter, and I feel my heart 
glow with an enthusiasm which elevates me to 



heaven; for nothing contributes so much to tran- 
quillize the mind as a steady purpose, — a point on 
which the soul may fix its intellectual eye. This 
expedition has been the favourite dream of my 
early years. I have read with ardour the accounts 
of the various voyages which have been made in 
the prospect of arriving at the North Pacific Ocean 
through the seas which surround the pole. You may 
remember, that a history of all the voyages made 
for purposes of discovery composed the whole of 
our good uncle Thomas's library. My education was 
neglected, yet I was passionately fond of reading. 
These volumes were my study day and night, and 
my familiarity with them increased that regret which 
I had felt, as a child, on learning that my father's 
dying injunction had forbidden my uncle to allow me 
to embark in a sea-faring life. 

These visions faded when I perused, for the 
first time, those poets whose effusions entranced 
my soul, and lifted it to heaven. I also became a 
poet, and for one year lived in a Paradise of my 
own creation; I imagined that I also might obtain 



a niche in the temple where the names of Homer 
and Shakespeare are consecrated. You are well 
acquainted with my failure, and how heavily I bore 
the disappointment. But just at that time I inherited 
the fortune of my cousin, and my thoughts were 
turned into the channel of their earlier bent. 

Six years have passed since I resolved on my 
present undertaking. I can, even now, remember 
the hour from which I dedicated myself to this great 
enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to 
hardship. I accompanied the whale-fishers on sev- 
eral expeditions to the North Sea; I voluntarily en- 
dured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I of- 
ten worked harder than the common sailors dur- 
ing the day, and devoted my nights to the study 
of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those 
branches of physical science from which a naval 
adventurer might derive the greatest practical ad- 
vantage. Twice I actually hired myself as an under- 
mate in a Greenland whaler, and acquitted myself 
to admiration. I must own I felt a little proud, when 
my captain offered me the second dignity in the 



vessel, and entreated me to remain with the great- 
est earnestness; so valuable did he consider my 
services. 

And now, dear Margaret, do I not deserve to ac- 
complish some great purpose. My life might have 
been passed in ease and luxury; but I preferred 
glory to every enticement that wealth placed in my 
path. Oh, that some encouraging voice would an- 
swer in the affirmative! My courage and my resolu- 
tion is firm; but my hopes fluctuate, and my spirits 
are often depressed. I am about to proceed on a 
long and difficult voyage; the emergencies of which 
will demand all my fortitude: I am required not only 
to raise the spirits of others, but sometimes to sus- 
tain my own, when their's are failing. 

This is the most favourable period for travelling 
in Russia. They fly quickly over the snow in their 
sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in my opinion, 
far more agreeable than that of an English stage- 
coach. The cold is not excessive, if you are wrapt in 
furs, a dress which I have already adopted; for there 
is a great difference between walking the deck and 



remaining seated motionless for hours, when no 
exercise prevents the blood from actually freezing in 
your veins. I have no ambition to lose my life on the 
post-road between St. Petersburgh and Archangel. 

I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or 
three weeks; and my intention is to hire a ship there, 
which can easily be done by paying the insurance 
for the owner, and to engage as many sailors as I 
think necessary among those who are accustomed 
to the whale-fishing. I do not intend to sail until 
the month of June: and when shall I return? Ah, 
dear sister, how can I answer this question? If I 
succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will 
pass before you and I may meet. If I fail, you will 
see me again soon, or never. 

Farewell, my dear, excellent, Margaret. Heaven 
shower down blessings on you, and save me, that I 
may again and again testify my gratitude for all your 
love and kindness. 

Your affectionate brother, 
R. Walton. 



Letter II 



To Mrs. Saville, England. 

Archangel, 28th March, 17— 

How slowly the time passes here, encompassed 
as I am by frost and snow; yet a second step is 
taken towards my enterprise. I have hired a vessel, 
and am occupied in collecting my sailors; those 
whom I have already engaged appear to be men on 
whom I can depend, and are certainly possessed 
of dauntless courage. 

But I have one want which I have never yet 
been able to satisfy; and the absence of the object 



of which I now feel as a most severe evil. I have no 
friend, Margaret: when I am glowing with the enthu- 
siasm of success, there will be none to participate 
my joy; if I am assailed by disappointment, no one 
will endeavour to sustain me in dejection. I shall 
commit my thoughts to paper, it is true; but that is a 
poor medium for the communication of feeling. I de- 
sire the company of a man who could sympathize 
with me; whose eyes would reply to mine. You may 
deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I bitterly feel 
the want of a friend. I have no one near me, gentle 
yet courageous, possessed of a cultivated as well 
as of a capacious mind, whose tastes are like my 
own, to approve or amend my plans. How would 
such a friend repair the faults of your poor brother! 
I am too ardent in execution, and too impatient of 
difficulties. But it is a still greater evil to me that I 
am self-educated: for the first fourteen years of my 
life I ran wild on a common, and read nothing but 
our uncle Thomas's books of voyages. At that age I 
became acquainted with the celebrated poets of our 
own country; but it was only when it had ceased to 



be in my power to derive its most important benefits 
from such a conviction, that I perceived the neces- 
sity of becoming acquainted with more languages 
than that of my native country. Now I am twenty- 
eight, and am in reality more illiterate than many 
school-boys of fifteen. It is true that I have thought 
more, and that my day dreams are more extended 
and magnificent; but they want (as the painters call 
it) keeping; and I greatly need a friend who would 
have sense enough not to despise me as roman- 
tic, and affection enough for me to endeavour to 
regulate my mind. 

Well, these are useless complaints; I shall cer- 
tainly find no friend on the wide ocean, nor even 
here in Archangel, among merchants and seamen. 
Yet some feelings, unallied to the dross of human 
nature, beat even in these rugged bosoms. My lieu- 
tenant, for instance, is a man of wonderful courage 
and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory. He 
is an Englishman, and in the midst of national and 
professional prejudices, unsoftened by cultivation, 
retains some of the noblest endowments of human- 



ity. I first became acquainted with him on board 
a whale vessel: finding that he was unemployed 
in this city, I easily engaged him to assist in my 
enterprise. 

The master is a person of an excellent dispo- 
sition, and is remarkable in the ship for his gen- 
tleness, and the mildness of his discipline. He is, 
indeed, of so amiable a nature, that he will not hunt 
(a favourite, and almost the only amusement here), 
because he cannot endure to spill blood. He is, 
moreover, heroically generous. Some years ago he 
loved a young Russian lady, of moderate fortune; 
and having amassed a considerable sum in prize- 
money, the father of the girl consented to the match. 
He saw his mistress once before the destined cere- 
mony; but she was bathed in tears, and, throwing 
herself at his feet, entreated him to spare her, con- 
fessing at the same time that she loved another, but 
that he was poor, and that her father would never 
consent to the union. My generous friend reassured 
the suppliant, and on being informed of the name of 
her lover instantly abandoned his pursuit. He had 



already bought a farm with his money, on which he 
had designed to pass the remainder of his life; but 
he bestowed the whole on his rival, together with 
the remains of his prize-money to purchase stock, 
and then himself solicited the young woman's father 
to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the 
old man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound 
in honour to my friend; who, when he found the 
father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned 
until he heard that his former mistress was married 
according to her inclinations. "What a noble fellow!" 
you will exclaim. He is so; but then he has passed 
all his life on board a vessel, and has scarcely an 
idea beyond the rope and the shroud. 

But do not suppose that, because I complain a 
little, or because I can conceive a consolation for 
my toils which I may never know, that I am wavering 
in my resolutions. Those are as fixed as fate; and 
my voyage is only now delayed until the weather 
shall permit my embarkation. The winter has been 
dreadfully severe; but the spring promises well, and 
it is considered as a remarkably early season; so 



that, perhaps, I may sail sooner than I expected. I 
shall do nothing rashly; you know me sufficiently 
to confide in my prudence and considerateness 
whenever the safety of others is committed to my 
care. 

I cannot describe to you my sensations on the 
near prospect of my undertaking. It is impossible to 
communicate to you a conception of the trembling 
sensation, half pleasurable and half fearful, with 
which I am preparing to depart. I am going to unex- 
plored regions, to "the land of mist and snow;" but I 
shall kill no albatross, therefore do not be alarmed 
for my safety. 

Shall I meet you again, after having traversed 
immense seas, and returned by the most southern 
cape of Africa or America? I dare not expect such 
success, yet I cannot bear to look on the reverse 
of the picture. Continue to write to me by every 
opportunity: I may receive your letters (though the 
chance is very doubtful) on some occasions when 
I need them most to support my spirits. I love you 
very tenderly. Remember me with affection, should 



you never hear from me again. 



Your affectionate brother, 
Robert Walton. 



Letter 



To Mrs. Saville, England. 

July 7th, 17—. 

MY DEAR SISTER, 

I write a few lines in haste, to say that I am safe, 
and well advanced on my voyage. This letter will 
reach England by a merchant-man now on its home- 
ward voyage from Archangel; more fortunate than I, 
who may not see my native land, perhaps, for many 
years. I am, however, in good spirits: my men are 
bold, and apparently firm of purpose; nor do the 



floating sheets of ice that continually pass us, indi- 
cating the dangers of the region towards which we 
are advancing, appear to dismay them. We have 
already reached a very high latitude; but it is the 
height of summer, and although not so warm as in 
England, the southern gales, which blow us speed- 
ily towards those shores which I so ardently desire 
to attain, breathe a degree of renovating warmth 
which I had not expected. 

No incidents have hitherto befallen us, that 
would make a figure in a letter. One or two stiff 
gales, and the breaking of a mast, are accidents 
which experienced navigators scarcely remember 
to record; and I shall be well content, if nothing 
worse happen to us during our voyage. 

Adieu, my dear Margaret. Be assured, that for 
my own sake, as well as your's, I will not rashly 
encounter danger. I will be cool, persevering, and 
prudent. 

Remember me to all my English friends. 



Most affectionately yours, 
R. W. 



Letter IV 



To Mrs. Saville, England. 

August 5th, 17—. 

So strange an accident has happened to us, that 
I cannot forbear recording it, although it is very 
probable that you will see me before these papers 
can come into your possession. 

Last Monday (July 31st), we were nearly sur- 
rounded by ice, which closed in the ship on all 
sides, scarcely leaving her the sea room in which 
she floated. Our situation was somewhat danger- 
ous, especially as we were compassed round by a 



very thick fog. We accordingly lay to, hoping that 
some change would take place in the atmosphere 
and weather. 

About two o'clock the mist cleared away, and we 
beheld, stretched out in every direction, vast and 
irregular plains of ice, which seemed to have no 
end. Some of my comrades groaned, and my own 
mind began to grow watchful with anxious thoughts, 
when a strange sight suddenly attracted our at- 
tention, and diverted our solicitude from our own 
situation. We perceived a low carriage, fixed on a 
sledge and drawn by dogs, pass on towards the 
north, at the distance of half a mile: a being which 
had the shape of a man, but apparently of gigan- 
tic stature, sat in the sledge, and guided the dogs. 
We watched the rapid progress of the traveller with 
our telescopes, until he was lost among the distant 
inequalities of the ice. 

This appearance excited our unqualified won- 
der. We were, as we believed, many hundred miles 
from any land; but this apparition seemed to denote 
that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had sup- 



posed. Shut in, however, by ice, it was impossible 
to follow his track, which we had observed with the 
greatest attention. 

About two hours after this occurrence, we heard 
the ground sea; and before night the ice broke, and 
freed our ship. We, however, lay to until the morn- 
ing, fearing to encounter in the dark those large 
loose masses which float about after the breaking 
up of the ice. I profited of this time to rest for a few 
hours. 

In the morning, however, as soon as it was light, 
I went upon deck, and found all the sailors busy on 
one side of the vessel, apparently talking to some 
one in the sea. It was, in fact, a sledge, like that we 
had seen before, which had drifted towards us in 
the night, on a large fragment of ice. Only one dog 
remained alive; but there was a human being within 
it, whom the sailors were persuading to enter the 
vessel. He was not, as the other traveller seemed 
to be, a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered 
island, but an European. When I appeared on deck, 
the master said, "Here is our captain, and he will 



not allow you to perish on the open sea." 

On perceiving me, the stranger addressed me 
in English, although with a foreign accent. "Before I 
come on board your vessel," said he, "will you have 
the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?" 
You may conceive my astonishment on hearing 
such a question addressed to me from a man on 
the brink of destruction, and to whom I should have 
supposed that my vessel would have been a re- 
source which he would not have exchanged for the 
most precious wealth the earth can afford. I replied, 
however, that we were on a voyage of discovery 
towards the northern pole. 

Upon hearing this he appeared satisfied, and 
consented to come on board. Good God! Margaret, 
if you had seen the man who thus capitulated for 
his safety, your surprise would have been bound- 
less. His limbs were nearly frozen, and his body 
dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and suffering. I 
never saw a man in so wretched a condition. We at- 
tempted to carry him into the cabin; but as soon as 
he had quitted the fresh air, he fainted. We accord- 



ingly brought him back to the deck, and restored 
him to animation by rubbing him with brandy, and 
forcing him to swallow a small quantity. As soon 
as he shewed signs of life, we wrapped him up in 
blankets, and placed him near the chimney of the 
kitchen-stove. By slow degrees he recovered, and 
ate a little soup, which restored him wonderfully. 

Two days passed in this manner before he was 
able to speak; and I often feared that his sufferings 
had deprived him of understanding. When he had 
in some measure recovered, I removed him to my 
own cabin, and attended on him as much as my 
duty would permit. I never saw a more interesting 
creature: his eyes have generally an expression 
of wildness, and even madness; but there are mo- 
ments when, if any one performs an act of kindness 
towards him, or does him any the most trifling ser- 
vice, his whole countenance is lighted up, as it were, 
with a beam of benevolence and sweetness that 
I never saw equalled. But he is generally melan- 
choly and despairing; and sometimes he gnashes 
his teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woes that 



oppresses him. 

When my guest was a little recovered, I had 
great trouble to keep off the men, who wished to 
ask him a thousand questions; but I would not allow 
him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in a 
state of body and mind whose restoration evidently 
depended upon entire repose. Once, however, the 
lieutenant asked, Why he had come so far upon the 
ice in so strange a vehicle? 

His countenance instantly assumed an aspect 
of the deepest gloom; and he replied, "To seek one 
who fled from me." 

"And did the man whom you pursued travel in 
the same fashion?" 

"Yes." 

"Then I fancy we have seen him; for, the day be- 
fore we picked you up, we saw some dogs drawing 
a sledge, with a man in it, across the ice." 

This aroused the stranger's attention; and he 
asked a multitude of questions concerning the route 
which the daemon, as he called him, had pursued. 
Soon after, when he was alone with me, he said, "I 



have, doubtless, excited your curiosity, as well as 
that of these good people; but you are too consid- 
erate to make inquiries." 

"Certainly; it would indeed be very impertinent 
and inhuman in me to trouble you with any inquisi- 
tiveness of mine." 

"And yet you rescued me from a strange and 
perilous situation; you have benevolently restored 
me to life." 

Soon after this he inquired, if I thought that 
the breaking up of the ice had destroyed the other 
sledge? I replied, that I could not answer with any 
degree of certainty; for the ice had not broken until 
near midnight, and the traveller might have arrived 
at a place of safety before that time; but of this I 
could not judge. 

From this time the stranger seemed very eager 
to be upon deck, to watch for the sledge which 
had before appeared; but I have persuaded him 
to remain in the cabin, for he is far too weak to 
sustain the rawness of the atmosphere. But I have 
promised that some one should watch for him, and 



give him instant notice if any new object should 
appear in sight. 

Such is my journal of what relates to this 
strange occurrence up to the present day. The 
stranger has gradually improved in health, but is 
very silent, and appears uneasy when any one 
except myself enters his cabin. Yet his manners are 
so conciliating and gentle, that the sailors are all 
interested in him, although they have had very little 
communication with him. For my own part, I begin 
to love him as a brother; and his constant and deep 
grief fills me with sympathy and compassion. He 
must have been a noble creature in his better days, 
being even now in wreck so attractive and amiable. 

I said in one of my letters, my dear Margaret, 
that I should find no friend on the wide ocean; yet I 
have found a man who, before his spirit had been 
broken by misery, I should have been happy to have 
possessed as the brother of my heart. 

I shall continue my journal concerning the 
stranger at intervals, should I have any fresh inci- 
dents to record. 



August 13th, 17—. 

My affection for my guest increases every day. 
He excites at once my admiration and my pity to 
an astonishing degree. How can I see so noble 
a creature destroyed by misery without feeling the 
most poignant grief? He is so gentle, yet so wise; 
his mind is so cultivated; and when he speaks, 
although his words are culled with the choicest 
art, yet they flow with rapidity and unparalleled elo- 
quence. 

He is now much recovered from his illness, and 
is continually on the deck, apparently watching for 
the sledge that preceded his own. Yet, although 
unhappy, he is not so utterly occupied by his own 
misery, but that he interests himself deeply in the 
employments of others. He has asked me many 
questions concerning my design; and I have re- 
lated my little history frankly to him. He appeared 
pleased with the confidence, and suggested several 
alterations in my plan, which I shall find exceedingly 
useful. There is no pedantry in his manner; but 



all he does appears to spring solely from the in- 
terest he instinctively takes in the welfare of those 
who surround him. He is often overcome by gloom, 
and then he sits by himself, and tries to overcome 
all that is sullen or unsocial in his humour. These 
paroxysms pass from him like a cloud from before 
the sun, though his dejection never leaves him. I 
have endeavoured to win his confidence; and I trust 
that I have succeeded. One day I mentioned to him 
the desire I had always felt of finding a friend who 
might sympathize with me, and direct me by his 
counsel. I said, I did not belong to that class of men 
who are offended by advice. "I am self-educated, 
and perhaps I hardly rely sufficiently upon my own 
powers. I wish therefore that my companion should 
be wiser and more experienced than myself, to 
confirm and support me; nor have I believed it im- 
possible to find a true friend." 

"I agree with you," replied the stranger, "in be- 
lieving that friendship is not only a desirable, but 
a possible acquisition. I once had a friend, the 
most noble of human creatures, and am entitled, 



therefore, to judge respecting friendship. You have 
hope, and the world before you, and have no cause 

for despair. But I I have lost every thing, and 

cannot begin life anew." 

As he said this, his countenance became ex- 
pressive of a calm settled grief, that touched me to 
the heart. But he was silent, and presently retired 
to his cabin. 

Even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel 
more deeply than he does the beauties of nature. 
The starry sky, the sea, and every sight afforded 
by these wonderful regions, seems still to have the 
power of elevating his soul from earth. Such a man 
has a double existence: he may suffer misery, and 
be overwhelmed by disappointments; yet when he 
has retired into himself, he will be like a celestial 
spirit, that has a halo around him, within whose 
circle no grief or folly ventures. 

Will you laugh at the enthusiasm I express con- 
cerning this divine wanderer? If you do, you must 
have certainly lost that simplicity which was once 
your characteristic charm. Yet, if you will, smile at 



the warmth of my expressions, while I find every 
day new causes for repeating them. 

August 19th, 17—. 

Yesterday the stranger said to me, "You may 
easily perceive, Captain Walton, that I have suf- 
fered great and unparalleled misfortunes. I had 
determined, once, that the memory of these evils 
should die with me; but you have won me to alter 
my determination. You seek for knowledge and wis- 
dom, as I once did; and I ardently hope that the 
gratification of your wishes may not be a serpent to 
sting you, as mine has been. I do not know that the 
relation of my misfortunes will be useful to you, yet, 
if you are inclined, listen to my tale. I believe that 
the strange incidents connected with it will afford 
a view of nature, which may enlarge your faculties 
and understanding. You will hear of powers and 
occurrences, such as you have been accustomed 
to believe impossible: but I do not doubt that my 
tale conveys in its series internal evidence of the 
truth of the events of which it is composed." 



You may easily conceive that I was much grati- 
fied by the offered communication; yet I could not 
endure that he should renew his grief by a recital 
of his misfortunes. I felt the greatest eagerness 
to hear the promised narrative, partly from curios- 
ity, and partly from a strong desire to ameliorate 
his fate, if it were in my power. I expressed these 
feelings in my answer. 

"I thank you," he replied, "for your sympathy, but 
it is useless; my fate is nearly fulfilled. I wait but for 
one event, and then I shall repose in peace. I under- 
stand your feeling," continued he, perceiving that I 
wished to interrupt him; "but you are mistaken, my 
friend, if thus you will allow me to name you; noth- 
ing can alter my destiny: listen to my history, and 
you will perceive how irrevocably it is determined." 

He then told me, that he would commence his 
narrative the next day when I should be at leisure. 
This promise drew from me the warmest thanks. I 
have resolved every night, when I am not engaged, 
to record, as nearly as possible in his own words, 
what he has related during the day. If I should be 



engaged, I will at least make notes. This manuscript 
will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure: but 
to me, who know him, and who hear it from his own 
lips, with what interest and sympathy shall I read it 
in some future day! 



Chapter I 



I am by birth a Genevese; and my family is one of 
the most distinguished of that republic. My ances- 
tors had been for many years counsellors and syn- 
dics; and my father had filled several public situa- 
tions with honour and reputation. He was respected 
by all who knew him for his integrity and indefati- 
gable attention to public business. He passed his 
younger days perpetually occupied by the affairs 
of his country; and it was not until the decline of 
life that he thought of marrying, and bestowing on 
the state sons who might carry his virtues and his 
name down to posterity. 



As the circumstances of his marriage illustrate 
his character, I cannot refrain from relating them. 
One of his most intimate friends was a merchant, 
who, from a flourishing state, fell, through numerous 
mischances, into poverty. This man, whose name 
was Beaufort, was of a proud and unbending dis- 
position, and could not bear to live in poverty and 
oblivion in the same country where he had formerly 
been distinguished for his rank and magnificence. 
Having paid his debts, therefore, in the most hon- 
ourable manner, he retreated with his daughter to 
the town of Lucerne, where he lived unknown and 
in wretchedness. My father loved Beaufort with 
the truest friendship, and was deeply grieved by 
his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances. He 
grieved also for the loss of his society, and resolved 
to seek him out and endeavour to persuade him to 
begin the world again through his credit and assis- 
tance. 

Beaufort had taken effectual measures to con- 
ceal himself; and it was ten months before my father 
discovered his abode. Overjoyed at this discovery, 



he hastened to the house, which was situated in a 
mean street, near the Reuss. But when he entered, 
misery and despair alone welcomed him. Beaufort 
had saved but a very small sum of money from the 
wreck of his fortunes; but it was sufficient to provide 
him with sustenance for some months, and in the 
mean time he hoped to procure some respectable 
employment in a merchant's house. The interval 
was consequently spent in inaction; his grief only 
became more deep and rankling, when he had 
leisure for reflection; and at length it took so fast 
hold of his mind, that at the end of three months he 
lay on a bed of sickness, incapable of any exertion. 
His daughter attended him with the greatest 
tenderness; but she saw with despair that their little 
fund was rapidly decreasing, and that there was no 
other prospect of support. But Caroline Beaufort 
possessed a mind of an uncommon mould; and 
her courage rose to support her in her adversity. 
She procured plain work; she plaited straw; and by 
various means contrived to earn a pittance scarcely 
sufficient to support life. 



Several months passed in this manner. Her 
father grew worse; her time was more entirely oc- 
cupied in attending him; her means of subsistence 
decreased; and in the tenth month her father died in 
her arms, leaving her an orphan and a beggar. This 
last blow overcame her; and she knelt by Beaufort's 
coffin, weeping bitterly, when my father entered the 
chamber. He came like a protecting spirit to the 
poor girl, who committed herself to his care, and 
after the interment of his friend he conducted her 
to Geneva, and placed her under the protection 
of a relation. Two years after this event Caroline 
became his wife. 

When my father became a husband and a par- 
ent, he found his time so occupied by the duties 
of his new situation, that he relinquished many of 
his public employments, and devoted himself to the 
education of his children. Of these I was the eldest, 
and the destined successor to all his labours and 
utility. No creature could have more tender parents 
than mine. My improvement and health were their 
constant care, especially as I remained for several 



years their only child. But before I continue my nar- 
rative, I must record an incident which took place 
when I was four years of age. 

My father had a sister, whom he tenderly loved, 
and who had married early in life an Italian gentle- 
man. Soon after her marriage, she had accompa- 
nied her husband into her native country, and for 
some years my father had very little communication 
with her. About the time I mentioned she died; and 
a few months afterwards he received a letter from 
her husband, acquainting him with his intention of 
marrying an Italian lady, and requesting my father 
to take charge of the infant Elizabeth, the only child 
of his deceased sister. "It is my wish," he said, "that 
you should consider her as your own daughter, and 
educate her thus. Her mother's fortune is secured 
to her, the documents of which I will commit to your 
keeping. Reflect upon this proposition; and de- 
cide whether you would prefer educating your niece 
yourself to her being brought up by a stepmother." 

My father did not hestitate, and immediately 
went to Italy, that he might accompany the little Eliz- 



abeth to her future home. I have often heard my 
mother say, that she was at that time the most beau- 
tiful child she had ever seen, and shewed signs 
even then of a gentle and affectionate disposition. 
These indications, and a desire to bind as closely 
as possible the ties of domestic love, determined 
my mother to consider Elizabeth as my future wife; 
a design which she never found reason to repent. 
From this time Elizabeth Lavenza became my 
playfellow, and, as we grew older, my friend. She 
was docile and good tempered, yet gay and play- 
ful as a summer insect. Although she was lively 
and animated, her feelings were strong and deep, 
and her disposition uncommonly affectionate. No 
one could better enjoy liberty, yet no one could sub- 
mit with more grace than she did to constraint and 
caprice. Her imagination was luxuriant, yet her ca- 
pability of application was great. Her person was 
the image of her mind; her hazel eyes, although as 
lively as a bird's, possessed an attractive softness. 
Her figure was light and airy; and, though capable 
of enduring great fatigue, she appeared the most 



fragile creature in the world. While I admired her 
understanding and fancy, I loved to tend on her, as 
I should on a favourite animal; and I never saw so 
much grace both of person and mind united to so 
little pretension. 